---
title: "Linux 102 - Implementing and Administrating Linux"
collection: teaching
type: "Extension course"
permalink: /teaching/2010-07-linux-102
venue: "Instituto Infnet, Network Engineering School"
date: 2010-07-07
location: "Rio de Janeiro, Brazil"
---

I developed and taught this follow up Fundamentals Linux Administration extension course at [Instituto Infnet](https://www.infnet.edu.br) from 2010 to 2014. During the extension course, participants explored various topics such as hardware configuration, boot processes, package management, disk partitioning, command-line usage, filesystem management, file permissions, and system file organization. The course included hands-on exercises and practical demonstrations. Students learned how to configure hardware settings, design disk layouts, manage software packages, manipulate files and directories, and understand the Linux filesystem hierarchy.

I personally developed all the courseware for this class.

Topics
======
1. **Shell and Shell Scripting -** This topic covered customizing and scripting the shell environment, including setting variables, writing functions, and managing profiles. It also covers creating simple Bash scripts using standard syntax, conditional statements, and script management.
2. **User Interface and Desktops -** This segment focused on X11 installation and configuration, managing Xorg configurations, exploring Linux desktop environments, and troubleshooting graphical user interfaces effectively.
3. **Administrative Tasks -** Participants delved into essential administrative tasks in this segment of the Linux Administration course, focusing on user and group account management, system file handling, and automation of system administration tasks using cron and systemd timers. It also included localization and internationalization settings for different language environments.
4. **System Services -** This module covered essential system management tasks, such as Linux system time, logging (including strategies for centralized log management), Mail Transfer Agents (MTA) basics, and managing printers through CUPS.
5. **Networking Fundamentals -** This module covers fundamental network management aspects. The students learned about the TCP/IP network basics, such as network masks, CIDR notation, and the differences between IPv4 and IPv6. They also acquired knowledge of the common TCP and UDP ports and services and how to perform basic network troubleshooting, which included manual configuration of network interfaces and routing. Other subjects included managing persistent network configurations using tools like NetworkManager and systemd-networkd and configuring and troubleshooting DNS on client hosts.
5. **Security Fundamentals -**
